LATENT DEMAND. Two words that explain why AI is about to create the single largest economic productivity boom in human history. No. The hype boys are not wrong on this one. Here's the concept: there is an ENORMOUS amount of demand sitting under the long tail of the curve that never gets fulfilled. The #1 reason? Of course, it's price. AI is obliterating this barrier. Everywhere. All at once. Let's run through an example to help articulate. We'll start in advertising. I've been building businesses for years. To produce a high-quality UGC-style ad (the format that actually wins on Meta) I'd typically have to pay a creator ~$200-$400 to build that high-quality ad for me. And I'd need dozens of these every quarter. My business could afford paying $300 per high-quality ad because we built a machine that could convert those ads into dollars at a marginal profit. It made economic sense for us to invest in creating these ads. But the long tail of businesses — the mom and pop shops, the restaurants, the solo founders — they can't pay $300 for a single, high-quality ad. However now? With AI?! Now you can generate this same winning ad for $20 of API credits (shoutout Calico AI). And guess what, the demand that exists for high quality ad creative at the $20 price point is MASSIVELY MASSIVELY larger than what existed at $300. It's not even close. Let's do another one. Web design. Used to cost $1,000-$10,000 to get a website built out depending on the agency you use. Today? You can build an unbelievably good site with Claude for $0.20 of API calls. The number of people/businesses/agents that want a website at $0.20 dwarfs the market that existed at $5,000. This is the pattern many VCs missed with Uber. The taxi market was $8 billion. Looked capped. But when you collapsed the friction — one tap, cheaper, no waiting — the market grew 100x. The demand was always there. The friction was hiding it. Now apply this to every service vertical simultaneously. E.g. legal docs, accounting, design, copywriting, translation, customer support, ad creative, engineering prototypes — all of them dropping 10-100x in cost at the same time. The area under the demand curve at these new price points is so much larger than what existed before that we're not talking about market disruption. We're talking about market creation at a scale that has no historical precedent. The world is about to get dramatically richer and most people are still debating whether AI is a bubble. It's not a bubble. It's a flood finding its level.